# CS31310 Agile Methodologies

This is Neil's module about Agile Methodologies. He goes over lots of highly
exciting topics such as Extreme Programming, Test Driven Developments, Anti
Patterns and other such things.

Customer Collaboration over Contract Negotiation
Working Code over Comprehensive Documentation
Responding to change over following the plan
Individuals' interactions over processes

## Agile Manifesto

> The Agile Manifesto, published in 2001, is stated below.
> We are uncovering better ways of developing software by doing it and
> helping others do it. Through this work we have come to value:
>
> * Individuals and interactions over processes and tools.
> * Working software over comprehensive documentation.
> * Customer collaboration over contract negotiation.
> * Responding to change over following a plan.
>
> That is, while there is value in the items on the right, we value the items
> on the left more. (Source: agilemanifesto.org)
> For each of these values, discuss why the words in bold print are valued
> more than the words in light print.
> [16 Marks]

*I reckon 16 marks means 4 marks per point. Each point has two sides to it so 2 points per side*

### Individuals and interactions over processes and tools

Whilst it is important to use the right processes and tools in software
development to help your team work effectively together, facilitating
direct interaction of individuals often allows much more effective
communication of ideas and problems. For example, if developers are encouraged
to use a bug tracker rather than approach each other directly, then serious
problems may be temporarily overlooked and placed on a virtual backlog
instead and not getting resolved. If developers interact and discuss issues
then real progress can be made to resolve them rather than ignoring them for a
few more iterations.

### Working software over comprehensive documentation

The traditional waterfall model (W Royce, 1970) focuses very heavily on
comprehensive documentation and making sure that all aspects of the software
have been designed and written up before any programming happens. In agile, it
is better to have software that works even if the documentation isn't fully
functional since clients can't deploy and run documents.

##Extreme Programming (XP)

Extreme Programming (XP) is a practice invented by Kant Beck\* of Chrysler Corp.
Beck identified weaknesses in existing waterfall models for software
development and decided to create XP as a better system in large software
development teams. 

*Sidenote: Beck also invented JUnit*

### Rationale

Beck decided that people were drawing too many parallels between Software
Engineering and Physical Engineering and this was slowing things down:a

* Software is much more malleable than physics
* There are fewer costs involved with changing things later on (in construction
  you might have already purchased the materials for your bridge)
* With software it's a lot harder to get a full and accurate list of system
  specs and these specs might change.

XP aims to make the cost of change lower through better communication between
the team and the customer

### Planning Game

### Pair Programming

XP has three distinct planning games:

    * Initial Planning - before the project has started
    * Release Planning - done throughout in order to determine when the next
      stable release should be shipped
    * Iteration planning - done each 'iteration' to determine what work needs
      to be done before the next one.


### Crack Customer


## Agile Revision Session

Back of the book for notes.


### Past Paper Questions

> "Do you expect a given answer for some questions."

There are points raised by the author of the material. The examiner is expecting to see some points of this, but you should be looking to expand upon this.

Alternative answers are both likely and acceptable.

Anything intelligent is good :), more than facts are expected. Analysis and comparison are the issues are good to see on the bigger questions: **discuss**.

Agile is a popular approach, but there are different ways of being agile. Bring together your own experience from IY and the fuck the group project. Combine that with the raw ideals of agile.

Good paragraph structure is helpful.


### Problems with the exam

> "I'm worried about not being able to learn a list of topics."

Pair programming -> TDD -> Refractoring.

Follow the thread through.

Definitely no anti-pattern question :). However you might get anti-patterns in a resit.

Having major surgery is not a good exam strategy ;).

Some of the stronger answers draw in other aspects of agile.

FDD vs. XP: compare and contrast. FDD has some upfront design and planning. XP does not. FDD has a single person related, etc. Advantages and disadvantages.

1 mark a minutes, resolve this appropriately. More structure for more marks. Some marks will be easier to gain than others.


### Model Driven Development

Model is the central artifact. Emphasis on developing a model of the system to be built. Models are described in various ways.

Computational dependant. Business logic of the model

Platform independent. Business logic without worries of platform.

Can take platform independent model and build platform dependant models.

All the time you focus on the model.

In the context of agile:

* If you focus on the model, you focus on design by default, violating XP.
* Is it actually possible for this to be agile?
* Creating all XX UML models for the platform dependant ones, straight away violating no upfront design.
* Why does XP have no upfront design? Designs go out of date quickly.
* What happens when code and design get out of sync?
* What if the models are executable? Modelling language and tools to make code. Can then start having agile models.
* Depends on what tools you have? Agile principals?
* Compilers are tools too though.
* How do you test this?
    * In experience, testing is tied up in simulations.
    * Lots of research goes into this.

Read essays linked of the blackboard page.



## Agile Methodologies 2012 Exam Answers

1.  a. The Agile Manifesto by Beck et al prposes several ways to improve
    software development by refocussing developers' priorities to produce
    software that accurately meets its requirements.

    The manifesto states that individuals and actions hold more value than
    processes and tools i.e. conversation between individuals is a better means
    for communication and understanding than relying on tools and 'policies and
    practices'. Tooling still holds value - it may remind developers of a
    conversation they had and provide paper trails for planning. However, it is
    better for team members to communicate directly with each other than to
    wait for a company policy or process to give them access to knowledge that
    they need.

    It can be said that comprehensive documentation adds value to working
    software. However if the software is incomplete or doesn't exist because
    focus has been put on documentation then nothing of value has been
    delivered to the customers. In an ideal world, both artifacts would be
    provided but if there's not enough time, working software provides value to
    the customer, even if the documentation is incomplete.

    Customer collaboration over contract negotation asserts that tension over
    pay and deadlines occuring between developers and customers can waste time
    and detract from the quality of the software. Whilst it is important that
    developers get paid adequately and are treated fairly, a helpful and
    collaborative relationship with the customer is much more condusive to high
    quality software than bickering about budgets.

    If there is a change to a customer's requirements or a new circumstance, it
    is better for the developers to respond to the change instead of sticking
    to the original plan. After all, the old plan no longer reflects the
    customer's requirements and would result in a product that holds little
    value to them. However, updated requirements must still be carefully
    planned out and changes prioritised to prevent total anarchy and derailment
    of the project.
  
  b. Using an agile or Plan based design methodology for large software
     projects is a very important decision to make at the start of a project.

     It is possible to identify all of a software's project requirements before
     work starts - especially in cases where the project is quite simple and
     there has been a lot of investment into analysing the problem. However,
     for more complex projects it is almost impossible to identify all of the
     requirements at the beginning. Some requirements may only emerge after the
     developer has been working on the project for a while, learning its
     intricacies effectively. In these cases, an agile approach may be more
     effective.

     Another complication is the likelhood that a project's requirements may
     change during development. It may be possible to use a plan-based approach
     for current requirements, but these do not respond well to change and may
     result in software that doesn't offer the customer any real value.

     Plan based approaches can be useful in circumstances where a lot of
     analysis has already been done and requirements are static - like the
     creation of motor firmware for a space robot. However, in times of
     uncertainty and change, Agile might be a better approach.

  c. Agile processes promote sustainable development. This means that agile
     works well at helping developers identify 'dangerous' aspects of a
     software project such as changes in specification, and account for them in
     their project plan. Before Agile, projects typically become very expensive
     to maintain and the cost of maintainence increased with respect to time -
     making many projects prohibitively expensive to maintain. Agile aims to
     reduce the cost of maintainence on software projects and keep the product
     useful and maintainable for as long as the customer requires it.


