# CS36410 - Intelligent Robotics

Myra Wilson (mxw) and Mark Neal (mjn).

### Assessment

* 100% Exam (3 from 5).

CS26410 get it easy and are assessed on practicals :(


### Commitment

* 16 Lectures
* 6 hours of practicals after Easter
* Background reading


### Robot Definitions

> N. "A machine capable of carrying out a complex series of actions automatically, especially one programmable by a computer."

Not the best definition as a washing machine could potentially be defined to be a robot.

A better description of the discipline is one which includes

* Design, manufacture, control and programming of robots
* Use to solve problems.
* Study of control processes, sensors and algorithms used in humans, animals and machines.
* The application of these control processes and algorithms to the design of robots.

Specific organisms have evolved to interact with the environment. So now a lot of research is done to build robots to imitate these simple organisms. We're starting to get to the point where you can do similar mechanical things.

Nature is a big inspiration for robotics

Essential part of robotics is the interaction with the environment. A robot should be able to perceive the world and affect the world around it.

From "Rabota" the Czech meaning for menial labour/work. Term "robot" coined in K. Chapek's play "Rossum's Universal Robots" (1920).

Robotics first used by Issac Asimov in his novels. Also brought up the ethics of robots:

1. A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human to be harmed.
2. A robot must obey orders from a human, except where it conflicts with the first law.
3. A robot must protect it's own existence, except where it conflicts with the first or second law.


### What do we want out of a robot?

Do we want one single robot to do many tasks or lots to do singular ones?

We already have things like Roomba and Asimov. Space robots are particularly popular.

Working on more and more complex robots.

Abstracted biological principals - stealing ideas from nature.

Something will always go wrong with robots.

Swarm robotics quire interesting.


### Why would we use a robot?

Where humans would be at significant risk (space exploration, nuclear deactivation, etc.)

Economically better to have a robot where menial and repetitive tasks need a high level of accuracy.

Humanitarian use where there is a great risk (search and rescue in danger areas).

Bottom-up approach tends towards better performance (implement the simplest organism first, then work upwards. Natural selection, different levels of behaviour which can communicate).


### Environmental Differences

* Computers
    * Input symbols are static
    * Operation given consistent results
    * Environment is fixed and repeatable
    * System only receives intended inputs
    * Perfect performance assumed
* Robots
    * Noise
    * Actions may have different responses
    * Objects may move independently
    * Influences from external agents can interfere
    * Operation environment is unreliable, dynamic and incomplete.



### Intelligent Robotics

> *"An intelligent robot is a machine able to extract information from its environment and use knowledge about its world to move safely in a meaningful and purposive manner."* - Arkin

> *"An intelligent robot is a machine creture which can function autonomously."* - Murphy

Usually specific to function.

Popular for industrial usage, especially production lines.

Revolution in computing power has allowed for a rise of more sci-fi robots. Now quite common military.

###3 'D's of Robots

* Dirty
* Dull
* Dangerous


### Levels of autonomy

###Remote Control
Completely controlled via a remote by a human.

Robot Wars (*A: Myra is awesome*).

Not intelligent at all.

###Teleoperation
Human operator controls robot from a distance, who usually cannot physically see the robot.

Sensors acquire information about the environment and is displayed for the operator to see. This can allow for addition sensory capacity (i.e. high pitched noises, etc.) so long as it can be displayed in a meaningful way.

Requires a communication link, there's a number of websites which offer this kind of this.

Requires $\ge$ one operator.

This is most useful when tasks are unstructured and aren't repetitive.

Situations where this is likely: a dynamic environment, dexterous task, need for advanced perception.

Important to have a good form of displaying the data meaningfully.

Needs trained operators.

###Telesense
Introduces Virtual Reality (VR) to teleoperation

Attempts to remove some of the cognitive fatigue and simulation sickness from the operator.

Operator has complete sensory feedback.

This is very expensive and requires a high bandwidth rate. 

###Semi-autonomous
Able to perform tasks autonomously. Good for planetary missions.

Good for unstable communication.

Continuous assistance; delegate tasks to the robot whilst observing it. Can use teleoperation for delegate tasks. Still needs the high bandwidth.

Control trading; human initiates the action for the robot to complete autonomously. Assumes robot is capable of autonomously accomplishing tasks robustly to unexpected situations.

###Autonomous
Able to perform tasks autonomously without any human input.

"Weak Autonomy" - robots which carry on-board controllers and power supplied.

"Strong Autonomy" - Require the power of self-government:

* Ability to move in its environment to perform a number of tasks
* Adapt to changes in environment
* Determine its course of action by its own reasoning processes
* Build internal representation of the world to plan and learn from experience and change its behaviour accordingly

(*A: Reinforcement learning is probably one of the better techniques for this?*)


### Achieving Autonomy

Artificial Intelligence Approach

* Knowledge Representation
* Natural Language Processing (NLP)
* Learning
* Planning and Problem Solving
* Inference
* Search
* Vision (and other sensor readings)

Robotics feeds into AI and vice versa.
## Mobile Robots

No longer so limited, power issues.


### Overview

Wheels most common (easily understandable). Legs and fliers less common as more complex. A lot of biologically inspired movement.


### Locomotion

> N. "Movement or the ability to move from one place to another."

Tethered are fairly common to, partly due to the expense.

###Stability

Legs less stable than wheels (generally).

* Number and geometry of contact points
* Centre of gravity
* Static/dynamic stability
* Inclination of terrain

Humans can be statically stable, but that's due to muscles always being strained, walking is more like controlled falling and use dynamics of the situation to help conserve energy.

The higher the centre of gravity the less stable you will be. Difficult to control high centre of gravity.

Rough terrain may impair stability.


###Characteristics of contact

Small area of foot or large footprint?

* Contact point/path
* Angle of contact
* Friction

"Umbrella"-like foot to stop sinking in snow, etc.

Friction - pulling, pushing power.


###Environment

* Structure and medium.

Water will affect the sensors you use.

Ground types.

Ground -> air robots are now coming along; fairly impressive :). Transition is the most important in this.

Have to understand the morphology (how the robot is built).

Understanding the relation to the environment.

Understand the material properties, that is what it's made of, how the joints work, etc.

Sometimes a small change in the morphology of the robot can make a large change.


### Wheeled robot systems

Wheels have been around for a long time and are well understood. Fairly versatile and lots of different types:

* Standard
* Castor
* Swedish
* Spherical

All can be motorized, steered or just passive.

Different types good for different tasks.

4 wheels is good for stability. Different combination of powered and steered wheels. FWD, RWD, 4x4. Turning circles not great. Omnidirectional wheels can help this.

3 wheels are less stable. Quit common to have 2 powered, differential wheels with an extra point of contact. Good lab-based robots. Better turning circles that 4WD typically. 

Machina Speculatrix 3WD with valves and motors. One of the first biological inspired robots. Powered, steerable first wheel, sensor on the same steering column as the wheel.

2 wheels are pretty unstable. First examples of dynamic stability (inverted pendulum). Lots of feedback needed. Low centre of gravity helps.

Unicycle robots very uncommon.

6 wheels better for terrain. Independent suspension usually needed to stop balance issues. Good pulling power. On the Mars Rover the wheels are also steppers. 

Tracks can be very useful for rough terrain (think tanks). Problem with tracks is the maintenance of tracks. Turning is skid based. Can solve some climbing problems.

Statically stable if $\gt$ 2 wheels. Useful on solid terrain; rough terrain requires bigger robots.


###Advantages

* More stable
* Less energy
* Simple Design
* **Cheap**


###Disadvantages

* Specific to environment
* Climbing ability? (Doctor Who: "ELEVATE")


### Legged Robots Systems

Advantages of adaptability and manoeuvrability over rough terrain - capable of crossing pits and holes.

Disadvantages of power and mechanical complexity. Difficult to control.

Legs must be capable of sustaining part of the robots total weight.

Problem between static stability and dynamic stability.

1 leg: hoppers. MIT looking at controlling legs.

2 legs: more stable, cat still act like hoppers. One of the most difficult robots to make due to the inherent instability of the robot. Can only be statically stable within limits and have no dynamic stability. Must keep servoing while standing still.

Passive dynamic walkers able to walk down an incline without actuation and without control. Closer to how humans walk than some of the statically stable robots.

Yet to have bipedal robots going faster than humans.


###Static Walking

Projection of COG on the round always inside the foot support area.

Always in a stable equilibrium.

Not biologically plausible

Control first, morphology second.

Low energy efficiency

Better manoeuvrability (stair climbing)


###Dynamic Walking

Projection of COG on the ground can be outside the foot support area.

Mostly not in a stable equilibrium.

Biologically plausible (and inspired)

Morphology and its dynamics are more important than control.

Energy efficient

Weak manoeuvrability, no steps.



---

4 legs: statically stable while standing, but not when walking. Gait analysis of animals can be used to provide walking motion. Technically challenging.

$\gt 4$ legs: More statically stable. Reduces control complexity. Various gait patterns, useful for rough terrain.


### Flying Robot Systems

The obvious problems.


### Wheeled Walkers

Ensemble of walkers and wheels (duh).

Prime example: (Jim's) Mars Rover.


### Biologically Inspired Robots

Energy efficiency. Snakes, tuna, snakes, etc.


### Autonomous Sailing

Talk to Mark Neal.


### Summary

Energy efficiency is important. Advanced materials needed.

Morphology essential for dynamical stable systems.

The characteristics of a robot are governed by choices:

* Stability
* Manoeuvrability
* Controllability
* Depends on the application and environment
## Sensors and Perception

Fewer limitations than before, power is the biggest issue.

> Sensor (n.) - A device that measure a physical quantity and converts it into a signal which can be read by an observer or by an instrument.

Interpretation performed by observer.


### Logical Sensors
A logical sensor is a unit of sensing or module that supplies a particular percept. It consists of the signal processing from the physical sensor and the software processing needed to extract the percept. It is ythe functional building block for perception.

Encourages modular design.


### Behavioural Sensor Fusion
*Sensor fusion* is a brad term for any process that combines information from multiple sensors into a single percept.

The motivation for this stems from three basic combinations:

* Redundant
* Complementary
* Coordinated

Can be used when a particular sensor is too imprecise or noisy to give reliable data. Adding a second sensor can give another "vote" for the percept.

This is to try and avoid high *false positives* and *false negatives* rates.

*Physical redundancy* allow two similar sensors to perceive objects from two different locations (one sensor might be better at sensing lower objects whilst the other high objects).

*Logical redundancy* is the use of different algorithms to process the information from a single sensor.



### Passive sensors

Environment provides energy generating the signal (no interaction).

e.g.: Light sensor, temperature sensors, etc.


### Active Sensors

Sensor puts out energy into the environment to either change or enhance it.

More energy usage

e.g.: Sonar


### Active Sensing

Moving the sensor around to get a better view of the environment.


### Sensor Categories

* Binary
* Analogue
* Discrete
* Arrays:
    * Linear (sonar ring)
    * 2D (camera)
    * IR sensitive pixels
    * Artificial skin
    * etc.

###Robotic Specifics

Global sensors, sensors outside of the robot.

Local sensors which are on-board and powered by the robot.

Internal (proprioceptive) sensors to monitor the robot's internals, or external (extrioceptive)


### Sensor Attributes

### Field of View (FOV)

How much of the world can *reliably* be measured?

Vertical, horizontal degrees and range.


### Accuracy, repeatability and resolution

Accuracy - How close to a set length can your sensor measure to?

Repeatability - Is it doing the same thing every time? (noise?)

Resolution - What degree can be measured to?


### Responsiveness in the target domain

How well does the sensor work in the current environment?

> You may have a sensor which is brilliant for brick walls, if you then introduce a glass surface does it still respond?


### Power Consumption

Active sensors drain power.


### Hardware Reliability

Sensors work best within a certain range of physical conditions.


### Size

Relative to the robot.


### Computational complexity

How does the computation of the sensor data scale?

Time is the biggest factor involved with this generally ;)

Big-O notation.


### Interpretation Reliability

How reliable will that sensor be in a particular environment?


### Attributes for a sensor suite

Surviving a failure is referred to as *fault tolerance*.

### Simplicity

Straightforward hardware and operating principals are less likely to go wrong.


### Modularity
The ability to remove or add sensors without implications.


### Redundancy
Physical redundancy - having 2+ identical sensors. Remembering the problems of not being able to have two sensors in the exact same place.

Logical redundancy - having 2+ different sensors measuring the same quantity.


### Common Sensors in Robotics

### Shaft-encoder
Mounted directly on the motorshaft before the gearbox (higher resolution). Counts the number of ticks.

With two, the phase-shift between encoder signals 1 and 2 indicate direction.


### Accelerometer
Measures acceleration along one axis; one way to do this: linear variable differential transformer (LVDT) measures linear displacement.


### Gyroscope
Measuring rotation change of orientation along one axis. Fundamental to helicopters.


### Inclinometer
Measuring absolute orientation angle about one axis.


### Compass
Measuring absolute orientation using the Earth's magnetic field. Keep away from any electromagnets (wheels, speakers, etc.).

Analogue (low resolution) or digital.

Frequently applied for self-localisation.


### Global Position System (GPS)
Have become more accurate. Within a meter outdoors (is that enough?).

Outdoors better (obviously).


### Sonar Sensors
Proximity measure (15cm - 5m)

FOX approx. 15 deg.

Main problems: reflections and interferences.

Sends out an acoustic signal (50kKHz - 250KHz) is emitted for about 1ms, the time until echo returns is a measure for how far the object is. If no signal is received in a given time then the reading is too far and ignored.

Very cheap. Good for a general view of the environment.

Can be used underwater with a change in frequency.

#### Reflections
Signals seem to take longer to come back as it has reflected.

#### Interferences
A ping from one sensor picked up by another.


### Lasers
Similar principals to sonar but faster and 2D capabilities (indoor 8-32m, outdoor 32-80m).

Scanner is quite large.


### Infra-Red (IR)
Non-linear proximity measure. Below the measure ranges, values indicate larger distances. Strategies needed for close objects.


### Force Sensors
Used to measure the amount of force applied to the sensor.


### Cameras
Digital cameras you get an array of colour model-encoded pixels (3 bytes, 24-bits "true colour"); grey resolution - 1 byte.

CMOS sensor chips measure only brightness, but colour filter for each pixel delivers colour data.

CMOS sensor senses more green as this is more true to the human eye. Format of this is:

-- --
G  R
B  G
-- --

Trade-off between frame-rate and resolution.

Manufacturers focused on resolution while robotisitics would prefer high frame-rate.

Omni-vision via hyperbolic mirror ($2\pi$ vision).

Cameras can be put on an active system - pan and tilt system or pan, tilt and verge system.

####3D cameras
Distance measue via pixel correspondence between two images from different cameras.

Calibration can be difficult and camera configuration cannot be changed afterwards.

Pixel correspondence difficult for homogeneous regions and in general has high computation costs.

Changing light conditions are difficult to handle.

####3D Laser Scanners
Provide distance and reflectivity independent of the lighting conditions.

Expensive and unwieldy.


### The Perception Problem
Read a value from the sensor, then interpret the data, then perform an action or reaction.

### Reading from Sensors
Information derived directly from the real world.

What do we mean by direct?

* Voltages
* Presence
* etc.

### Interpret Data
How to abstract sensor values into assumptions about the real world.

Perception is limited by:

* Physical Sensory ability
* Method of reading the sensors
* The assumptions made

### Performing actions and reactions
React to the sensor in a pre-defined way (reactive).

Store away for later use (deliberative).

More on this later in the course.

###The problem
Sensor data may be wrong.

Data from different sensors may or may not match.

Some sensor data can take longer to process than others, so there may be time lags.

Sensor data coming in from different sensors may be coming from different areas of the environment.

Deciding what to believe is a difficult task.


## Manipulators and Grippers
* Quick overview of robot manipulators and stuff
* May be fixed on a set base or on top of a mobile platform.
* Max DOF is 6 - 3 from arm and 3 from wrist
* DOM - degrees of motion - how many joints are in the arm all together.
     * Equates to number of links
* Types of joins:
    * Prismatic joint
    * Revolute joint
    
* Arm classifications:
    * cartesian - like the crane games in arcade
    * cylindrical - goes around a central spinny thing.
    * spherical 
    * articulated
   
* Grippers:
    * Electromagnetic - can pick up the wrong thing
    * End of arm tooling - anything goes provided you can power it
    * Robot hands - clunky and hard to control
    

### Parts of a Manipulator

Arm, wrist, end effector.

Reaching a point in space is done via the arm (3 degrees of freedom (DOF)) (movement in x,y,z).

Wrist provides an additional 3DOF (rotation in x,y,z)

Arm is made up of links connected via joints.

Each link is a degree of motion (DOM), while each joint can provide a new DOF.

DOF is the number of independent movements an arm can make.

DOM $\ne$ DOF


### Classifications of Arms

### Type of arm   Prismatic/Linear   Revolute/Rotary ------------------ -----------------
Cartesian            3                0
Cylindrical          2                1
Spherical            1                2
Articulated          0                3

###Cartesian Geometry Arm
Good repeatability.

Straight line motion good.


###Cylindrical Geometry Arm
Resolution depends on extension of the arm.

High speeds due to base rotation.

Inertia can be a problem.

###Spherical Geometry Arm
Two axes of low, variable resolution.

Fairly flexible (can reach below base).

Complex control algorithms.

###Articulated Geometry Arm
Resolution dependant of the arms position.

Accuracy poor.

Repeatability good.

Excellent flexibility.

Complex control.

Error compounds.

###Beyond 3 joints

####Parallel Linkages
Parallel linkages allows for higher load capacity.

Fast motion

High Stiffness

Direct drive.

e.g.: Stewart/Gough platform.

####Serial Linkages
More degrees of motion.

More flexibility.

Allows redundancy.

Many control issues.


### Arm Control - Direct Kinematics

$$\text{Joint space} (d_i,\theta_i) \rightarrow \text{Cartesian space} (x,y,z)$$

Usually use inverse kinematics instead as it's easier to give a set of Cartesian co-ordinates:

$$\text{Joint space} (d_i,\theta_i) \gets \text{Cartesian space} (x,y,z)$$

Sometimes there is no response.


### Wrists

Wrist provides orientation (yaw, pitch, yaw).


### Grippers

Vacuum, Electromagnetic, Fingers, End of arm tooling.
# General Issues of locomotion

* Problems depend on the platform you are using.

* Centre of gravity

* Design robot environment and medium

# Wheeled vehicles

* Passive wheels
* Steering wheels
* Combinations of both
* Omnidirectional wheels:
    * 4 omnidirectional wheels means it can turn on the spot
* 3 wheeled robots: 2 wheel differential drive and a third point of contact

# Tracks

* Keeping the tracks on
* Skid turning


# Robotic Control Architectures

## Legged robot systems

* cross things like holes and pits - more adaptable than wheels etc
* uses a lot more power
* more mechanically complex
* Static and dynamic stability

## Bipedal robots

* Statically stable within limits
* No dynamic stability
* Must use servos all the time to stay still
* Control is still a problem

## Passive walkers

* Walk down hills with no control or actuation
* Very clever idea but no way to control them
* Careful tuning of robot to the environment its in.

## Legged systems

Static stable walkers: 

* Always in a stable equilibrium
* Not biologically plausible - not how we work
* Control first, morphology second
* Low energy efficiency

Dynamic stable walkers:

* Center of gravity is outside of the foot area
* Mostly not in stable equilibrium
* Biologically plausible
* Morphology - controlled falling over
* Energy efficiency is high - just goes with the flow
* Weak manoeuverability - no steps


# four legged robot systems

* Static - stable while standing
* Control needed when moving legs to make it walk properly
* Aibo dog robot - games driven research
* 4 legs - 2 motors
* Synchronisation and de-synchronisation allow different gait patterns for turning etc.

* More legs means more stability - even when walking.

# Flying robot systems

* flying gondolas and stuff
* Affected by the weather
* Useful for difficult to access and hostile areas.
# Sensors and Perceptions

* Humans have bloody good sensory perception:
    * Visioon
    * Touch
    * Hearing
* Robots don't have the perception of human beings!
* Robots can use sensors to perceive their own performance
* Biological sensors: sensory receptors
* Interpretation of the values is important

## Passive sensors

* No interaction with environment - purely observational:
    * Temperature sensors
    * Light sensors

## Active Sensors

* Sensors put out energy into environment to change or enhance:
    * ultrasonic - echolocation etc
    * take more energy than passive sensors


## Active Sensing

* Moving the sensor around to get a better look at things - put on the end of a manipulator arm or something

## Sensor categories:

* Binary
* Analogue
* Digital
* Arrays:
    * Linear
    * 2D
    * IR sensitive skin
    * artificial skin
    
# Redundancy

Physical redundancy - two of the same sensor mounted on the robot
Logical redudancy - using two different sensors to calculate the same thing.

## Common sensors

* Shaft encoder - direction and speed
* Accelerometer - acceleration on one axis
* Inclinometer
* Compasses - use magnetic fields for absolute alignment - keep away from motors and speakers
* GPS - pretty good these days, outdoors
* Sonar - sometimes bounces off walls and stuff
    * Quite noisy sensors
    * They have interference and refraction
    
 * Cameras
    * Interpret pixel values
    * Manufacturers more concerned with resolution - roboticists want better frame rates
    * Using cameras and hyperbolic mirrors!
    * Moving cameras: pan, tilt, verge systems
 * 3D laser scanners
     * Notoriously noisy
     * Useful for mapping environments
     
## The Perception problem

* Lots of readings but how to interpret them?
* Reactive vs deliberative actions


## Architectures

### Autonomy

* Must be able to move around in the real world
* Must be able to respond to the real world
* Should be capable of performing tasks and interacting with the world
* Should be able to survive independently in the world for a period of time


### Robotics Paradigms

* Reactive
* Deliberative/Hierarchical
* Hybrid


### Primitives

### Robot Primitives  INPUT                     OUTPUT  ------------------------  ------------------
SENSE             Sensor Data               Sensed Information
PLAN              Information               Directives
ACT               Information or Directives Actuator Commands

LEARN is another suggested primitive, but no current architectures use this paradigm yet so a true paradigm shift has not occurred.


### Reactive Paradigm

Stems from the mid-80's, although other forms were around before then.

Originated through researchers looking at biology and cognitive science.

More accessible due to decrease in hardware costs and increase in processing power

Cheap.

Only uses `SENSE` and `ACT` primitives

Advantage that you're acting immediately with the real world. Lots of knowledge needed by the designer.

* Based on parallel "behaviours"
* Sensors connected directly to actuator
* Usually a simple arbitration mechanism
* Execute in the cycle time of most natural environments
* No generalised model of the world
* Uses the world as its own model
* Typically lacks a formal mechanism for handling complexity.


###Reflexive Behaviours
Reflexive behaviours are interesting as they imply the need for any type of cognition: if you sense it, you do it..

For a robot this would be a hardwired response, eliminating computation and guaranteeing speed of operation.

Reflexive behaviours can be categorised into three types:

1. Reflexes
2. Taxes
3. Fixed-action patterns

*Reflexes* are where the response lasts only as long as the stimulus and the response is proportional to the intensity of the stimulus.

*Taxes* are where the response it to move to a particular orientation. Baby turtles exhibit *tropotaxis*; they are hatched at night and move to the brightest light which, until recently, would be the ocean reflecting the moonlight. Ants exhibit a similar taxis, following trails of pheromones, this is known as *chemotaxis*.

*Fixed-action patterns* are where the response continues for a longer duration that the stimulus. This is helpful for fleeing predators. It is important to keep in mind that a taxis can be any orientation relative to a stimulus, not moving past.

These categories are not mutually exclusive. For example an animal going over rocks or through a forest where its view might be obscured might persist (fixed-action patterns) in orientating itself to the last sensed location of a food source (taxis) when it loses sight of it.

The tight coupling of action and perception can often be quantified by mathematical expressions. Animals can use external senses of percepts like gravity (*idiothetic*) combined with organs which sense external percepts like vision (*allothetic*) to perform a task.

###Coordination and control of behaviours
There are four ways to acquire a behaviour:

1. Innate
2. Sequence of innate behaviours
3. Innate with memory
4. Learn

*Innate* behaviours are behaviours which an entity is "born" with.

A *sequence of innate behaviours* is a sequence of behaviours which are innate, but which are triggered by the combination of internal state and the environment.

*Innate with memory* behaviours are innate behaviours which need some customisation based on the situation of the environment.

Behaviours which are not innate must be *learned*.



### Deliberative Paradigm

Also known as the hierarchical paradigm.

Uses `SENSE`, `PLAN` and `ACT` primitives. `ACT` primitive only works from directives.

Driven by AI research.

Big problem with processing time.

World model is the idealised model of the world.

"Brain" is the bottleneck.

Difficulty when working with dimensions, etc.

###Closed World Assumption and the Frame Problem
The *closed world assumption* says that the world model contains everything the robot needs to know; there can be no surprises.

If this assumption is violated the robot may not be able to function correctly.

The *frame problem* is the size complexity of a problem given the exponential nature of the real world.


### Agents Architecture

Each agent has a level of competence, no individual is able to complete the whole task.

Together and linking through cues agents are able to complete a task.


### Hybrid Paradigm

Uses all primitives. A combination of both.

Behaviour (`SENSE-ACT`) primitive created by directive from `PLAN` primitive. Behaviour primitives
are effectively reactive systems.

Decomposes tasks into subtasks; figuring out which behaviours are best to achieve subtasks.

Planner can eavesdrop on behaviours.


### Evaluation of Paradigms

###Criteria
* Modularity
* Niche target ability
* Portability
* Robustness


## Past Paper 2012

[Past Paper 2012](http://www.aber.ac.uk/en/media/CS36410-12.pdf)

### Question 1

This question examines the area of robot control architectures.

###Question 1.a)
Provide a description of reactive architectures, giving two examples to illustrate your answer.

---

* No PLAN primitive
* All sensor readings (SENSE) go into actuators (ACT)
* Biologically inspired
* Usually done in hardware for efficiency

Coward and aggressive diagrams.


###Question 1.b)
Provide a description of deliberative architectures, giving two examples to illustrate your answer.

---

* Sensor inputs (SENSE) passed into control algorithms (PLAN) which issue directives to actuators (ACT)
* No link from SENSE to ACT
* Computationally complex
* Can build up a world model

??


###Question 1.c)
A student project is set to design an architecture which allows a small robot to successfully find the centre of a tabletop maze. The robot must repeat the task 10 times with the maze changed randomly each time. 

Marks are awarded for the best average time taken for the robot to find the centre, and the quickest time overall to reach the centre. If you had the choice between using a deliberative or a reactive architecture for the above task, which would you use? Given detailed reasons for your choice.

---

Pros for reactive:

* Simple
* Reliable
* Low (or no) computation
* "Follow the left wall" strategy
* Not affected by the randomisation

Cons for reactive:

* No pathfinding - may get in loops. May go back to locations already visited. Cannot change strategy.
* Maybe too simple?
* Speed purely based on luck of the draw.

Pros for deliberative:

* Pathfinding algorithms to improve speed
* Can be made not to revisit unless necessary
* Can change strategies depending on situation

Cons for deliberative:

* Very complex
* Very difficult to get right
* May not be reliable
* Has to build up a world model to pathfind
* Computational complexity
* Power consumption?


### Question 2

This question examines the area of robot bodies and manipulator arms.

###Question 2.a)
What are the main parts of a robot manipulator? Briefly describe the function of each part.

---

* Arm - provides DOF
* Wrist - provides DOM
* End effector - manipulates environment.


###Question 2.b)
Discuss the difference between Degrees of Freedom (DOF) and Degrees of Motion (DOM), giving examples to illustrate your answer.

---

DOF - Cartesian coordinates (x,y,z)

DOM - Rotational (roll, pitch, yaw)


###Question 2.c)
A scientist requires a robot to retrieve experimental data from inside a volcano, including the acquisition of soil samples. A manipulator arm is required on a mobile platform.

####Part i)
What method of locomotion would you recommend for your robot? Discuss why you would choose this method.

---

Legs can deal with the soft terrain and are less likely to melt

Tracks not useful due to temperatures.

Wheels could be useful but all terrain tires may struggle with heat.


####Part ii)
Discuss the issues associated with mounting a manipulator arm on a mobile platform.

---

*No idea, here lies the blagfest*


### Question 3
This question examines the area of biologically inspired robotics.

###Question 3.a)
Describe the physical body, and the behaviour exhibited by Grey Walter’s turtles, and detail how the behaviour was achieved.

---

*No idea, revision needed here*


###Question 3.b)
Briefly discuss why many roboticists take inspiration from nature?

---

Known working examples.

Evolutionary design for reactive systems.


###question 3.c)
Using a system you have studied as an example (do not use your answer from the Grey Walter question in part a)), show where inspiration from nature has been successfully implemented in a robotic system.

---

*And some more revision here too*


### Question 4
This question examines aspects of the physical robot.

###Question 4.a)
Define the following terms:

---

1. Passive Sensing - reading energy from the environment.
2. Active Sensing - putting some form of energy into the environment to sense it.


###Question 4.b)
Describe stereo vision and active vision systems, highlighting the similarities and differences between them.

---

Stereo - two cameras, uses CV techniques to be able to work out where an object is when the distance between the cameras is known.

Active - the camera is movable.

*more revision*


###Question 4.c)
“Logically redundant sensors can be used interchangeably”. What are logically redundant sensors? Discuss whether the above statement is true, giving detailed reasons for your answer.

---

Logically redundant sensors; using different processing algorithms from the same sensor reading.

Not interchangeable as specific to the type of sensor.



###Question 4.d)
Discuss the 3 different stages of the perception problem (reading a value from sensor, interpreting the data, and performing an action), giving examples to illustrate your answer.

---

Accuracy of sensors. Anomalous values from the sensor.



 

