# CS38010 - Professional Issues in Software Engineering

Rhys Parry and Frank Bott.

> *"I don't give a damn if you don't like bsns."* - Rhys Parry, 2013

Assignment on the business side. Exam on everything else.

A lot of the content comes from real experience.


### Course Topics

* Organisations
* Business Types
* Law, unions, etc.


### Reading List

BSC book is the best one to look at :)


### Examinations

50/50 assignment and exam.

###Exam 
* Law
* IPR
* Ethics
* Chartered Engineers
* Sustainability
* etc.

###Assignment
Business plan with emphasis on financials.

Don't copy Rhys' spreadsheet ;)


### What is Business

* "An establishment to make money."
* "Useful and incentive."
* "Providing a service."
* "Trading."
* "Producing a product."
* "Innovating to remain competitive."
* "Solving a problem."
* "Franchising."

Most businesses are in it to make money (Authors note: *well duh*).

> *"Waffle Waffle Waffle, several Shades of Grey, waffle."*

tl;dr - A business is about making money.

All businesses need customers.

Thought of as some organisation...
## Organisations

> *"[Inland Revenue] are a bunch of thieves."* - Rhys Parry 2013


### Commercial Organisations


* Sole Trader
    * Local Shop, Plumber, etc.
* Partnership
    * Doctors, Lawyers, Accountants
* Limited Company
    * Public and private


### Sole Traders

An individual who is responsible for all debts. All assets including "private" at risk; if you have debts the business can't pay then you may lose personal items (including houses, etc.).

Can register for VAT, has to register for inland revenue/social security. Income tax on profits, national in-sewer-ants.

$$Profits = Sales - Costs$$

Simplified bookkeeping.

Does **not** have to be the only employee.

Lots of risks. Lots of independence and flexibility.


### Partnerships

Similar to sole trader but with two or more owners.

Normally professionals.

(*Rhys mentioned stuff about Limited Liability Partnerships which might be useful for the assignment.*)


### Incorporated

Law recognises individuals are responsible for actions (except by your, mental incapacity or registered student), can enter into contracts and can be sued, tried for crimes, etc.

Act of parliament imposes duties on the individual.

Incorporation; making a body (*Corpus*)

Make a company look like a person (a body).

* Royal Charters
* Acts of Parliament
* Public and Private Companies


### Share Capital

Shareholders (Subscribers) own the company. Managing Directors may not be shareholders. Ever limited company has to have at least one annual meeting with the shareholders.

At the start of the company you authorise the share capital (the number of shares and their nominal (par) value). You can set the company up with shares at £0.01 per share (100 shares for £1). All the shareholders lose is the initial investment; directors may be liable for bankruptcy. This stops "Phoenix Companies". A company may go bankrupt for no fault of it's own (e.g. due to recession).

In the United Kingdom, there seems to be a "looking down" on someone who has failed at a business, unlike in the USA and Germany.

Shares can be paid for (the shareholder's equity). This equity is put into the bank for the company. As a shareholder you can partly pay for these shares but if the company demands the full value of the shares you must pay it.

Preference shares are slightly different in that if you started a company. These shares take a set value of the profits before the rest of the shareholders.

When a company is "wound up" (going into liquidation, either voluntary or forced) all debts must be paid before the shareholders. All assets are sold. If there is a remainder then this remainder is divided equally between shareholders. If the debts are greater than the assets, the shareholders lose shares.

Quite often the owners buy the assets so the money goes back to the shareholders.

**Rhys' tip of the day:** if you need money go to friendly solicitor and threaten them with winding up procedures.

When a company goes public all shares are sold at a set price. The company then owns some of their own shares. Individuals will then buy shares because people want to buy shares, or because they will get some of the profit in the form of a dividend. The effect this has in the open market is that if you look at the initial price is the nominal value of the company. It's just that people are trading these shares as if they were selling tickets for an event. There's a slight difference in that most big companies will have shares in themselves so they can borrow money against their shares.

If you have a good share price, you become very attractive to banks.


### Bureaucracy

Large Companies (Public Limited Company [PLC]), shares are available to the public via the stock exchange.

Small companies cannot advertise shares in the same way. Regulated by Companies Act.

(*Some table on what a micro, small and medium company is*)


### Company Constitution

When you start a company you have to go and buy it.

In the UK it is easy to start and run a limited company.

> *"I hate to say this but some of my best friends are French."* Rhys Parry, February 2013



There is a Memorandum of Association, Articles of Association and there can be Shareholders Agreement.


###Memorandum of Association

* Restrictions on company name.
* Register for a specific country.
* The objects of company (Companies Act 1989 allow general commercial company).
* A liability clause (liability of members is limited).
* Authorised Share value.


###Articles of Association

* Rules of Share capital
* Transfer of Shares
* Meetings of Members
* Rules governing directors' appointments
* Power of directors
* Dividends and reserves

Changed in a shareholders meeting.

Dividends are the money which the directors decided (under the guidance of the shareholders) which is given away to the shareholders. Reserves help take the company into the next year.


###Shareholders Agreement

* Protect interests of minor shareholders
* Article of Associated can only be changed at a general meeting and needs a 75% majority (look this up, it may have changed).
* Agreement between shareholders, all shareholders must sign and can govern the way in which voting is done.


### Directors and Company Secretary

Directors elected by Shareholder who act in the best interest of the company. They should be honest, declare their interest in the company and aware of the company's trading position.

Directors split into executive and non-executive directors.

Executive directors work for the company, non-executive directors paid for the knowledge of the industry.

Company Secretary produce statutory returns to the companies house. Can be any person in the company.
## Company Finance

### Costs and Prices

Costs are the cost to build and make a product.

Price is the cost to your customer.


### Costs

Purchase costs include things like raw materials and equipment.

Costs of finance includes interest on debts, etc.

Cost of labour.

Overhead costs.

You might make money from an item, but you still make a loss on that item.

Fixed and Variable costs.

Staff costs: junior staff have around 220 chargeable days, senior staff have around 160 chargeable days (260 max).

Overhead costs not attributable to a given project.


### Depreciation

Most things depreciate in value. You need to know the value of equipment and stock, but sometimes it's too costly to revalue each item. Although you make profits/sales due to having an item, the actual item itself depreciates and is a cost to the business.

$$ profit = sales - costs $$

When you pay tax you want to reduce the amount of money going to the tax people and they allow you to take the depreciation of all your items from your profits.

Straight line depreciation means the item depreciates the same amount each year.

Reducing balance depreciation means the item depreciates by a percentage each year.


### Pricing in the Computing Industry

###Cost Plus - Project Work

Agree with client your costs per day, usually on direct labour (overhead).

Agree profit margin.

"Body shopping"

Unsuitable today for projects but used to supply skills/experience to customer projects.


###Fixed Price - Project Work

Total of: direct labour, brought in items and "indirects".

Profits added onto costs.

Used in competitive tendering (the higher the risk, the higher the profit). Risks versus profits.

####How this tends to work:
Engineers are graded (normally by salary). Company will work out an average salary per grade. Add in overheads and arrive at a daily charge.

When it comes to costing up a product, number of people; at what grade times by the daily rate for the estimate of the product length to come to a total amount of labour charges.

When you have a labour cost, you add the hardware (plus a markup on this hardware), then add a contingency. This is the big problem with fixed price work. This should be as high as you can make it. Finally add profit, simmer and serve.

Sometimes pricing is about losing business, but about being seen.

> *"Don't be afraid to add a markup."* Sage advice from Rhys Parry, February 2013


### Software Product Pricing

Marginal costs very low (manual, box, CD, etc.)

Large development costs.

Amortised over time.

Sales proportional to marketing.

Sales fall with increasing price.

> *"I must go on a diet"* - Rhys Parry after turning on some lights with his bulk, February 2013,


### Customer Expectations

### Price		Nature	------------------------------------------------
Free		Shareware
£20     	Buyers Risk - Internet Sales
£100-500	High volume - Real software - Office suits, etc.
£10,000		Real product - low volume - Bugs and Support
£1000,000	On the drawing board (or an IBM product)


### Support and other Issues

Large percentage of income (10-25% of turnover).


### Cash Flow

Gets confused with profits.

Bringing in a concept called *credit*. Business to business (B2B) relationships.

Most companies allow you credit. Upon invoice normally you have 30 days in credit.

Credit orders and invoices are the norm for B2B transactions.


### Payment Cycle

Send invoice at the end of the Month

Receive money 1-2 months later

Therefore up to 3 months salaries, rents, bills to pay, etc.

Problem is you need cash as a start-up.

Big companies are generally the worst for paying in time.

> *"Oh it's a long walk here."* - Rhys going from one side of Hugh Owen C4 to the other.

Cash in and cash out are not the same as sales, costs and profits.


### Types of Software House

Body Shopping Services - need a few months working capital.

Product Developer - Needs perhaps a year or more development funds.

Bespoke Software - Could use advanced from customer to help cash flow.


### Getting the Money

Business plan:

* Description of Business
* Technical feasibility
* Founders expertise
* Market size
* Competition
* Financial prediction

More later.


### Sources of Funds

* Loans
* Equity
* Grants


###Grants

Money *given* to a company. May have restrictions on various things.


###Loans

Money *lent* to a company. Interest payable on it, personal guarantees on the loan.

Secured loan has some assurance that you have enough collateral. Unsecured they don't.

Personal loans from friends.

Soft leans, short/long term, overdraft, etc.


###Equity

Money *paid* to the company for a *share* of that company.

Risk versus reward.

Dragons Den. I'm out.


### Balance Sheets

Time for motherfucking spreadsheets (in space).

Snapshot on a particular date.

How much are you worth?

* Assets, fixed and liquid (current).

How much do you owe?

* Tax
* VAT
* Creditors
* Bank Loans
* Shareholders

$$ Assets = Liabilities + Shareholders\text{ }Equity $$

###P/L Cost Overheads

* Wages
* NI
* Rent
* Rates - Business and Water
* Gas and Electricity
* Telephone, ISP
* Postage, Printing, Stationary
* Advertising
* Insurance
* Repairs and Maintenance
* Interest Payments
* Bank charges
* Depreciation
* Travel
* Legal
* Subscriptions and Periodicals

###Capital Equipment

Capital Equipment does not appear in the P/L, it is taken from the cashflow and the depreciation is treated as a cost in the P/L.


###Rhys' Tip for the Assignment (of the week)

Projected profile/loss worked out every month. Cashflow on a monthly basis. Balance sheet at the end of the year.


###Example Startup

Shareholders raise: £50,000

Cash goes in the bank.

After trading for a while:

Sales: £10,000 (invoiced)

VAT: £1,750

Purchases: £2,000

### Assets               Liabilities and Shareholders            ----------------------------
Receivables £11,750  ...
Cash on hand $48,000 ...
Computers £2,000     ...
Total £61,750        ...

Receivables are things that haven't been paid, but have been invoiced/similar.


### Remember this shit

Try this by purchasing items on credit to create liabilities, you put how much you owe on the liabilities side and the new item into your assets (this balances).

When you pay it off you lose the liability on one side and the cash from your asset side.

Reduce the profit (shareholders equity) by the depreciate to date, balances with loss of same amount on the assets side of the equation.

Balances sheets **balance**.

Balance sheets run vertically.


## Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)
Ways for big corporations to get stinking rich.

### Types of Rights
* Copyright
* Patents
* Confidential Information
* Trademarks
* Design Rights
* Moral Rights


### Copyright
Protects:

* Original works (literary, dramatic, musical and artistic).
* Sound recordings, films, broadcasts and cable transmissions.
* The typographic arrangement of published editions.

Any protected item is known as a "work".

### Software Copyright
The 1988 Copyright, Patents and Design Act states that the phrase "literary work" includes a table
or compilation, a computer program and preparatory design materials for a computer program.

An EU directive makes a similar clause.

### Copyright Holder Rights
Copyright holders get five exclusive rights:

1. The right to copy the work.
2. The right to issue copies to the public.
3. The right to perform, play or show the work to the public.
4. The right to broadcast the work or transmit it to a cable service.
5. The right to make an adaption of the work.

These rights last different lengths depending on the country - 70 years since the death of the 
author in the EU and USA (post-2002 for the latter). Pre-2002 USA copyright can last up to 95 
years in some cases.

50 years since the death of the author in Canada.

### Database Rights

If a database is the author's "own original intellectual creation", it is treated as a literary
work. If there has been "substantial investment in obtaining, verifying or presenting the contents
of the database", then it is also protected by the database right (which lasts 15 years less than
full copyright).

### Who Owns Copyright?
Copyright is owned by the author(s), unless the author is an employee and the work is created 
within the course of employment, then the copyright is held by the employer. An independent 
contractor does not count as an employee unless stated otherwise.

Copyright may only be transferred in writing.

Copyright is implied.

### Infringement

Anyone who, without consent, does any of the five things that are exclusive right of the owner 
of the copyright has committed *primary infringement*.

Anyone who does this knowingly has committed *secondary infringement*.

Primary infringement is purely a civil matter, secondary infringement can be a criminal matter.

### Registering Copyright
In the EU, full copyright protection comes into affect when the work is 'fixed' (i.e. recorded in
some form).

In the USA protection is very limited until the copyright has been registered with the US Congress
Office.

### What counts as a copy?
Copyright is breached by copying 'the whole or a substantial part of the work', substantial 
doesn't necessarily mean a large part, just a key part.

Non-literal copying (e.g. using the same design to produce a similar system in a different 
language) also counts as breaching copyright.


### Licensing
A license allows someone (the *licensee*) to use a work for some or all purposes but the owner 
retains ownership. These licenses can be *exclusive* or *non-exclusive*, for a fixed period or be
*in perpetuity*.

In an assignment, the copyright owner transfers some or all rights of ownership to someone else 
(the *assignee*).

### What is allowed?
* Fair dealing, copying for:
    * Private study or research.
    * Criticism or review.
    * Reporting current events.
* Marking a back-up copy.
* Selling on.
* Decompilation for interoperability.
* Error correction.

### Enforcing Copyright
* Search and seizure.
* Injunction.
* Damages.
* Claim for profits.

Powerful copyright owners often prevent legal publication of copies by threatening action the 
publisher cannot afford to defend.


### Patents

Patents give an inventor the exclusive right to use or exploit their invention (or sell it) for 
up to 20 years.

The invention must be:

* New;
* Novel (involve an inventive step);
* Capable of industrial application;
* Not specifically excluded.

All patents are published and are publicly available.

### Specific Exclusions
* Scientific Theories;
* Mathematical Theories;
* Literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works;
* Presentation or information;
* Schemes, rules, or methods for performing a mental act, playing a game or doing business; or a 
program for a computer.

### Patent Owners
Patents are only granted to inventors or subsequent assignees.

Employees are treated as inventors unless the invention is made in the course of their normal 
duties, in which case the inventor is the company (special rules for senior management).

### Getting a Patent
It is essential to establish a *priority* when applying for a patent. There is a need to apply 
early, even if the invention isn't perfect.

### Software Patents
European Patent Convention states that software isn't patentable.

Software is patentable in the USA and have been enforced in sensible situations.


### Confidential Information

Information cannot be 'stolen', information can be prevented from being disclosed or used provided
an *obligation of confidence* exists, this comes through a contract or through equity (fairness or
common law).

In some cases, public interest can override the obligation of confidence.


### Trademark Protection

Includes trademarks (logos, etc.), trade names or "get-up" (a uniform or similar).

There are international agreements between most companies which oblige them to enact domestic laws
that fulfil the requirements of the agreement.

A trademark must be registered in each company in which protection is desired.

It is a criminal offence to use an unauthorised copyright commercially.


### Domain Names

Originally meant as a simple way of connection over the internet but is now regarded as a 
marketing term. Domain names are assigned by ICANN.

Domain names can conflict with trademarks.
## Legislation



### Criminal Law
Represents society's view of what is acceptable behaviour and what is not. The police (and some 
other agencies) are responsible for apprehending those who break criminal law.

Society brings then before a court and punishment takes the form of imprisonment, a fine, 
community service, etc.


### Civil Law
Regulates the relationship between people. Action is initiated by the aggrieved party (the 
*claimant*, formerly - and still in the USA - the *plaintiff*).


### Standards of Proof
To convict someone of criminal offence, the prosecution must prove *beyond reasonable doubt* that
the defendant is guilty.

To obtain a judgement in a civil court, it is only necessary to establish the facts *on the 
balance of probabilities*.


### Natural persons and legal persons
Civil law is concerned with relationships between people. Therefore, unless a company is 
incorporated (a legal person) civil law is not applicable to a company.


### Common Law
Common law works by precedent (based on previous judgements). The judge may decide that a previous
judgement is no longer applicable. All countries are considered in common law.


### Case Law
Not all law may be clear so case law is the judges interpretation of a law.


### Statute Law

Statue law is laid down by Acts of Parliament, often referred to as **legislaton**.

### Secondary Legislation

An act of parliament often given the government power to introduce regulations (*statutory 
instruments*) that are laid before Parliament but are debated only if a member specifically calls 
for a debate.

###Examples:

* Copyright and Rights in Databases Regulations 1997
* Companies (Single Person Private Limited Companies) Regulations 1992
* Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations 1981


### European Union Law

The EU issues directives, approved by the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers. Member states are then required to enact legislation to give effect to these directives.

The European Count of Justice handles cases where the interpretation or implementation of directives is in question.

Data protection act was an EU act.


### Legal Systems in Other Countries

Distinction between civil and criminal law is universal. Common law largely restricted to countries that have been ruled by Britain. European countries other than the UK have a system based on Roman law.

Most large countries have bicameral legislatures, small ones usually have unicameral ones.

In some countries the second chamber has a revising function only while in others (e.g. the USA) it can also initiate legislation.

Federal states duplicate the legislative structure at the level of the individual state. There is often tension between state law and federal law.


### Constitutions


Most countries (not the UK) have constitutions:

* How the country is governed
* The rights of the citizens
* ???

In countries with a written constitution there is a Supreme count which can strike out a legislation that is contrary to the constitution.

In the UK, the doctrine of the *sovereignty of Parliament*, means that if Parliament passes legislation, the courts cannot block it.


## The IT profession

A profession is organised into one or more professional bodies, substantial education and experience are necessary to practise the profession.

The professional bodies themselves decide the nature of this education and experience, and, more generally, control entry to the profession.

The professional body lays down standards of conduct and good practise and polices them (the profession may have a monopoly over certain titles and/or activities).


### IT Professional Bodies

* BCS (**not** the British Computing Society any more).
* Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET)
* IMIS
* Association of Computing Professionals

* Association for Computing Machinery (ACM)
* Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) - has within it the IEEE Computer Society.


### The BCS

Code of Conduct and its enforcement:

> You shall
> 
> * Only undertake to do work or provide a service that is within your professional competence
> * NOT misrepresent or withhold information on the performance of products, systems or services [...] or<small>[sic]</small> take advantage of the lack of relevant knowledge or inexperience of others.
> * etc.

Education:

* Professional Examinations
* Accreditation of courses

Advancement of knowledge

* Specialist groups
* *Computer Journal*
* Conferences

Continues the professional development.

Maintenance of professional standards of practice.

Give advice to parliament and government.


### Reservation of Title

Certain title can only be used by members of certain bodies or, in some cases, by registered professionals.


### Reservation of functional

Certain tasks can only be undertaken by members of certain bodies or, in some cases, by registered professionals.
## Human Resource Management

A.K.A. Common Sense.

### Aims of HRM

To ensure that the organisation always has available the appropriately skilled, qualified and 
experienced staff that it needs in order to exploit its other assets, subject to

* the law;
* financial resources;
* company policy.


#Employment Law

Three main areas:

1. Anti-discrimination,
2. Trade Unions,
3. Welfare of individual employees.


##Discrimination

Characteristics:

* Age
* Disability
* Gender identity
* Marriage or Civil Partnership
* Pregnancy or maternity
* Race
* Religion or belief
* Sex
* Sexual Orientation

###Direct Discrimination
Treating one person less favourably than another purely on the grounds of any characteristic listed above.

###Indirect Discrimination
Imposing a requirement that:

* Can be satisfied by a much small proportion of people from one group of a characteristic than from another;
* Cannot be shown to be justifiable by the needs of the job.

###Discrimination on the grounds of disability
Treating a disabled person less favourably without justification and failing to make a reasonable adjustment without justification.

###Enforcement
Court action can only be initiated by the Equal Opportunities Commission (sex discrimination), the Commission for Racial Equality (racial discrimination) or the Disability Rights Commission, except that, individuals may take allegations of discrimination relating to employment directly to an Employment Tribunal.

###Industrial Tribunals/Labour Courts
Set up to handle cases of unfair dismissal and discrimination in employment matters brought by individuals. They are cheaper and simpler than civil courts, but legal or trade union representation is desirable.

Limited powers, but can award compensation and order reinstatement.

Appeals are rare but possible, although not often successful.

##Trade Unions
> "An organisation of workers created to protect and advance the interests of its members by negotiating agreements with employers on pay and conditions of work. Unions may also provide legal advice, financial assistance, sickness benefits and sickness facilities" - ACAS

A Trade Union is recognised by an employer when it negotiates agreements with an employer on pay and other employment contracts on behalf of the body of workers (the **bargaining unit**). This is called **collective bargaining**.

Recognition can be the result of voluntary agreement between the employer or union or it can be statutory (enforced by law).

###Labour Relations (pre-1980)
Collective bargaining and agreements were not legally enforceable. Many strikes were called, often unofficial, and against the wishes of the workers.

Violent picketing and secondary action (the support strike of workers in a secondary, separate, enterprise). Management found they couldn't make decisions and execute procedures because if union officials didn't agree the managers were afraid that there would be a strike.

###Trade Unions (pre-1980)
Unions were immune to actions for tort and breaches of contract in relation to "trade disputes".

Used a **closed shop** policy, where employers agree to hire union members only, and employees must remain union members at all times to retain employment.

Problem of multiple unions and differentials.

Unions were driven by a small number of anarchists.

Political levy.

###Employment Act (1980)
Secondary action made illegal.

Pickets could only picket their place of employment.

Unions encouraged to ballot their members before taking strike action.

###Employment Act (1982)
Redefined "trade dispute" to be a dispute between workers and their employer relating "wholly or mainly to terms of employment".

Union legal immunity removed when they authorised unlawful industrial action.

Improved rights for workers in closed shop policies.

###Employment Act (1984)
Ballot of members before strike action made mandatory, or legal immunity removed.

###Employment Acts (1988-1990)
Improving edge cases:

* Procedural changes for ballots
* Unlawful to discriminate on grounds of membership or non-membership of a union (removing closed shop policies)
* Union liable for damages arising from unofficial action unless explicitly repudiated.
* Selective dismissal of strikers permitted.

###Trade Union and Labour Regulations (Consolidated) Act (1992)
Replaced all previous legislation and consolidates it into a single act.

###Advisory Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS)
Founded in 1896 (present name and structure date from 1974) to prevent and resolve problems within the workplace, through conciliation, mediation and arbitration services.

Publish very helpful guides to good practice.


##Individual Employment Rights

* Unfair dismissal
* Contracts of employment
* Discriminations rights
* Maintenance of rights when transferred
* Right to join a union of choice (including no union)
* Limits on hours
* Statutory sick pay
* "Family friendly" rights

###Trade Union Reform and Employment Relations Act (1993)
Gives employees the right to join a union of their choice, permission required to deduct union subscription at source.

Extends the circumstances in which unfair dismissal can be claimed and extends maternity provisions.

###Employment Relations Act (1999)
Equality of treatment of part-time workers.

Parental leave and "family friendly" policies.

Increased protection against unfair dismissal.

Abolished the Commissioner for the Rights of Trade Union Members and the Commissioner for Protection Against Unlawful Industrial Action.

###Employment Relations Act (2003)
Parental and adoption leave.

Dispute resolution.

Improved industrial tribunal procedures.

Equal pay questionnaires.

###Dismissal
Grounds for fair dismissal:

* Conduct
* Capability
* Redundancy
* Statutory requirement
* *Any other reason*

But employer must follow correct procedures (**due process**).

Unfair dismissal is:

* When the employer fails to follow the due process
* Dismissal for any reason excluded by anti-discrimination legislation
* Dismissal for taking part in trade union activities
* Dismissal for taking action against an employer to enforce employment rights
* Dismissal on the grounds of pregnancy
* Dismissal for refusal to do shop or betting work on a Sunday
* Dismissal for *not* being a member of a trade union
* and many more...

###Redundancy
Dismissals because of redundancy occur when an employer no longer needs people to do their jobs. In most cases employees will be entitled to compensation based on their age, salary and years of service. The law lays down the minimum level of compensation, but it is typical for employers to pay more than this.

If the employer is intending to make 20 or more employees redundant over a period of 90 or less, the employees (or their representatives) have a right to be consulted.

There are two definitions of redundancy in British law. For the purposes of entitlement to compensation, redundancy occurs when an employee is dismissed because the employer no longer needs employees to do that job in that place.

In determining the right to consultation, however, redundancy is defined as occurring when the dismissal for a reason or reasons not relating to the individual employee.

It is common practise to use a stack based system when making employees redundant (LIFO), this is acceptable to unions and courts.

Dismissal for redundancy can easily become unfair dismissal if individuals are selected for redundancy in some other way (as with anything else).

####Constructive Dismissal
A fundamental breach, by the employer, of an employee's contract of employment, which effectively indicates that the employer no longer intends to be bound by it.

The employee can have recourse to an industrial tribunal as if an actual dismissal had taken place.

###Public Interest Disclosure Action (1998)
Protects employees who:

* Make disclosures about malpractice to their managers or bodies such as the HSE or the FSA provided the employee has reasonable grounds for the disclosure and it is made in good faith.
* Make disclosures about malpractice more widely (e.g. to the police, the press or an M.P.) provided it was not done for personal gain and
    * Reasonably believed they would have been victimised if it was raised internally or with a regulator, *or*
    * Reasonably believed there would be a cover-up if they raised it internally and there was no regulator, *or*
    * Had already been raised internally or with a regulator and nothing had been done.

###Wrongful Dismissal
Wrongful dismissal is significantly different from unfair dismissal, an action for wrongful dismissal is an action for damages brought by an employee against an employer for breach of the contract of employment. It is an action under the common law and for this reason is not subject to the maxima laid down by statue for unfair dismissal.

Typically brought by very senior or highly paid employees who can make a reasonable case for compensation resulting from their employer's breaking of contract.

###Contracts of Employment
Employment brings a legal contract into existence, whether it be in writing or not. Employers must provide employees with a written statement of the main terms of the employment.

Good practise is to provide a full written contract, signed by both employer and employee.

**Express terms** are explicit in the contract. **Implied terms** that a court will regard as always existing are those which may arise from:

* Statue
* Common law
* Custom and practise of the industry

Implied terms, as the name suggests, may not be explicitly stated.
## Revision Session

##Past Paper 2012

[Past Paper 2012](https://www.aber.ac.uk/en/media/CS38010-12.pdf)

###Question 1
This question is about intellectual property rights.

####Question 1.a)
Compare and contrast the protection that copyright and trademarks can provide for computer games software:

---

* Trademarks -> brands (characters, titles).
* Copyright, binaries, story, characters.
* Distribution
* Advertisement
* Distribution with written (?) permission
* Assignment to larger corps

* Trademarks only cover the brand
* Copyright covers a whole part of the work -> adoptions of the work.

####Question 1.b)
Explain what a patent is, and how a company would apply for a patent for a novel computer hardware device for potentially international sale. What documentation must be included in the application?

---

Patents give the owner an exclusive right to use or exploit an invention for up to 20 years. Must be new, novel, capable of industrial application and not specifically excluded.

* UK Patents office, within a year to the international patent office.
* Documentation to describe the inventive step.


###Question 2
This question looks at what is involved in job design.

####Question 2.a)
Discuss what is meant by job rotation, job enlargement and job enrichment.

---

* Rotation of responsibilities.
* Addition of similar responsibilities.
* Addition of wider responsibilities.

####Question 2.b)
Look at the following scenario in an accounts payable office.

* Freda receives incoming invoices and matches them to purchase orders
* Gareth confirms price calculations and despatches paperwork to the goods-in department for confirmation that goods or services have been received
* John receives confirmation from that department and passes paperwork for payment
* Peter produces the payment
* Julie handles queries arising at any of the above stages

Discuss how you would use job rotation, enlargement and enrichment to give benefits to the involvement and happiness of the staff.

---

First four get rotation weekly.

Enlargement means all 4 do the same for a group of invoices.

Julie gets enrichment by getting enlargement and her current job.

###Question 3
This question looks at outsourcing and discrimination at work.

####Question 3.a)
Explain what is meant by the term *outsourcing*.

---

N/A

####Question 3.b)
AberLamb Ltd specialises in providing meat products to local and more distant shops and supermarkets. The company has grown considerably over the last few years and it IT infrastructure is becoming a problem due to the company's lack of computer skills. Write a note to the managing director explaining why outsourcing may be the solution.

---

N/A

####Question 3.c)
What protection does European law offer to employees who are transferred to a different employer as a result of outsourcing?

---

Transference of rights. Same job must be given to a transferred person.

####Question 3.d)
Explain the difference between direct discrimination and indirect discrimination, illustrating your answer by suitable examples from at least two areas of discrimination.

---

* Direct discrimination is treating one group of people less favourably than another.
* Indirect is the imposing of a requirement which can be satisfied by a much smaller proportion of a group than from another which cannot be justifiable by the job requirements.

###Question 4
This question is about employee retention and professional status.

####Question 4.a)
Systems Designers PLC, a major UK software and service company with more than 1,000 employees, carried out an employee survey five years ago to help find out why employees were leaving at twice the rate of the industry average. Subsequent exit interviews suggested that poor pay rates were the cause of the high employee turnover. The company increased its pay rates, but the high turnover rate failed to decline. 

The company undertook a deeper investigation of employee turnover patterns over the last twelve months and found several factors were involved. The investigation also found that pay levels had the weakest impact on employee turnover.

Based on the above scenario that demonstrates the fallibility of exit interviews, discuss THREE factors you think would have more influence on employee turnover and explain why.

---

* Job satisfaction (training from professional bodies and development)
* Market forces (?)
* Discontent
* Politics and office conditions
* Job design

* Honesty of exit interviews

####Question 4.b)
Explain the terms reservation of title and reservation of function as applied to the professions, giving examples of professions in the UK to which each applies.

---

* Reservation of title - cannot use title unless allowed by a body
* Reservation of function - cannot practise a function unless allowed by a body

Vets (both), civil engineer (title), accountants (function), dietician (none).


####Question 4.c)
To what extent are these terms applicable to the engineering profession in the UK and in the USA.

---

In the USA engineers have to undergo specific tests.

Degree accreditation.


###Question 5
This question is on the subject of employment law.

Joan Doe was employed by a local pub as a barmaid on a six month contract. As part of her duties she had to ensure that all the glasses were washed and the bar tidied up ready for the cleaners in the morning. The pub had a kitchen and this was the final exit route that Joan had to take at night. Two stairs led down from the bar into the kitchen. One night when Joan was the last one leaving she noticed that the kitchen light had been switched off by the back door – on the other side of kitchen. On stepping down the stairs she fell in the dark and broke her collarbone.

Her employer didn't renew her contract.

####Question 5.a)
From what you have read, discuss Joan's employer's responsibility in this accident.

---

System should be in place to ensure this never happens. H&S procedure needs to be reviewed, incident book. Joan needs to report dangerous situations.

####Question 5.b)
Discuss the issues that Joan might have in relation to bringing a case against her employer for unfair dismissal.

---

Disability discrimination? Perfectly within their rights to not renew the contract.


