# SE31520: Developing Internet-Based Applications

Taught by Chris Loftus (cwl), Fred Long (fwl) and Dave Price (dap).

### Course Aims

The course will teach about the two main kinds of web-based applications:

* Customer to Business (C2B)
* Business to Business (B2B). These applications tend to use REST.

The framework these are based on is Ruby on Rails, however a lot of this applies to other systems
like Java EE or PHP.

The course will also discuss design and code pricipals and techniques.

Chris Loftus will be teaching Ruby on Rails, including items like RESTful services.

Fred Long will focus on security of web-applications.

Dave Price will then discuss rich internet application development (using JavaFX).
## Ruby on Rails


### Ruby
Ruby is a dynamically typed, pure object-orientated language. It's also something that most people
on SE31520 won't have used before.

It's dynamically typed nature means that test suites are a must.


### Why Rails?
Java EE is a steep learning curve, whilst Rails provides a fairly simple way of quickly building
internet-based applications.

Rails is CRUD-style:

* Create
* Read
* Update
* Delete

Later on in the course (particulary for RESTful web services) the reason this is important will 
become apparent and how these to align nicely with each other.

Rails is also nice as it fall within the 80% of the 80:20 rule; 80% of the time something like 
Rails if perfectly suitable for purpose. Only 20% of the time do you need something truely 
heavyweight like Java EE.

Rails has a very good development community, as does Ruby. This means there are a lot of resources
out there one can use for reference.

Rails also has a lot of resusable components available (Gems, plug-ins, etc.).


### Rails Design Philospohy
Rails follow the Don't Repeat Yourself (DRY) philosophy. You should define things once and once 
only.

It also follows convention over configuration, therefore providing sensible defaults and code 
generation to follow the Model View Controller (MVC) design pattern.


### Overview of the Rails Architecture
TODO Image here.

Generic Multi-teir Architechture:
TODO Another image here.


### Rails Applications

* `apps/` Contains the MVC generated code.
* `config/` Configuration files for things like databases and routes.
* `db/` Database descriptors. Includes migration files (allows the database to be changed without 
  too much pain).
* `doc/` Documentation.
* `lib/` Internal libraries (authors note: I think at least).
* `log/` Log files.
* `public/` Static content.
* `test/` Testing code.
* `vendor/` Plugins local to the application.
* `Gemfile` Defines all the gems used by the application. Note that if no version is specified then
  the latest version of the gem will be installed.
* `Rakefile` Ruby makefile.

It should be noted that Gems are system-wide and plugins are application specific.


### Rails MVC
Rails has a lot of conventions with it's code:

Actions related to the HTTP Request methods (i.e. REST).

Models are named as singular objects (e.g. User, Object, etc.).

Tables, views, and most other things are names as plurals (e.g. Users, Objects, etc.).

A top level controller, the application controller, provides common code to all other controllers
used in the rails application. All other controllers should extend this.


### Rails Database Management
Rails has three different databases:

* Development
* Production
* Test

All three of these are self-contained.

You can add index to the databases via the migration files in the following way:

```ruby
add_index :token, field
```


### Rails Layouts
The main application template is found in: `app/views/layouts/application.html.erb`.

The default CSS is found in: `?/scaffold.css.scss`. Rails uses SASS CSS, a more powerful varient of
CSS.

In `.erb` files there are several different tags for embedding ruby:

* `<%= ... %>` For embedded Ruby with a return value.
* `<% ... %>` For embedded Ruby with no return value, or where the return value shouldn't be printed.

Ruby tries to prevent cross-site request forgeries using: `<%= csrf_meta_tags %>`

Chris also mentioned HAML being better than `html.erb`.


### Testing Rails
Ruby being a dynamically typed language, testing is essential. In fact test-driven development is
advised when programming Ruby.

Test fixtures set up the test data.

Functional Tests test controllers.

Integration Tests test controllers working along a sequence.

The scaffolder generates a lot of these tests for you.

Chris also mentiond RSpec and Cucumber as behaviour driven testing libraries.


### Unit Tests in Rails

```ruby
class UT extend ActiveSupport::TestCase
```

Run `rake test:units` to run in isolation. Be warned that this is slow as it loads the whole of the
rails framwork into memory to do this.


### Functional Tests in Rails
Test correct behaviour rather than whether a method is doing what it should do. With rails this is
typically the HTTP Request and Response codes.


### Required Versions

* Ruby 1.9.3+
* Rails 3.2.8+


### Reading List
Agile Web Development with Rails.
## Interoperability


### Representational State Transfer (REST)
Notes for later.

* GET
* POST
* PUT
* DELETE


### Interoperability

Operating between systems. This can be:

* Within an organisation (i.e. within an intranet).
     * App to App (A2A)
     * Enterprise Application Integration (EAI)
* Between Organisations
     * Business to Business (B2B)

As a side note middleware supports interoperability (see CICS for a great example :D)


### Methods of Interoperability

* Sockets
* Remove Method Invokation (RMI) and Remote Procedure Call (RPC)
* Message-based.
* XML-Based
* XML Remote Procedure Call
* SOAP
* REST


### Sockets

Advantages:

* Cross platform
* Language inderpendant (via kernel).
* Reliabile (if used over TCP).
* Light-weight (if used over UDP).
* Encryption is easy to add.

Disadvantages:

* Need application specific protocol which tends not to be scalable.
* Cross language mappings are difficult.
* Lack of distribution services


### Remote Method Invokation and Remote Procedure Call

Advantages:

* (Un)Marshalling handelled automagically.
* Some distribution services.
* Access to CORBA IIOP (Common Object Requres Broker Architecture).
* Builds on services provided by sockets.

Disadvantages:

* Java specific
* Even with IIOP - it can be limited to Intranet due to firewalles.
* Synchronous Communication focus.
* Too low-level.
* Complex

### Message-based Protocol

Advantages:

* Asynchronous.
* Publish/Subscribe.
* Guarentees on delivery.

Disadvantages:

* Hard to make synchronous.
* Typically proprietary.
* Requires a message broker.


### XML-Based
Can be XML-RPC or SOAP/WSDL.

Have the advantage of being language and platform inderpendant, and have descriptors (XSD).


### XML Remote Procedure Call

Advantages:

* Similar to RMI/CORBA
* Evolved into SOAP
* Service represented by a single URL.
* Operation defined by the XML body of the HTTP Request (which is a POST).
* Scoping depends on context.

Disadvantages:

* Doesn't use all HTTP methods (only POST). Is a special protocol.
* Resources not identified explicitly.
* Unknown side-effects.


### SOAP

Advantages:

* Runs over HTTP(S).
* RPC and XML.
* Application-level.
* WSDL defines service operations.
* UDDI (Universtal Description Discovery Initiative) - A registry containing info about web 
  services (e.g. URL).

TODO Diagram here.

Disadvantages:

* Same issues as XML-RPC
* Complex specification.
* Inprecise specification.
* Specification was developed inderpendantly.

### REST

* Get
* Post (New)
* Put (Update)
* Delete
* Head

REST is inheritantly HTTP focused. As such all resources have a URL.

TODO Diagram here.


## REST in more Detail

### Resource Orientated Archiecture (ROA)

Concepts:
* Resource
* URI
* Representations
* Links

Properties:
* Adressability
* Statelessness.


### Resource

Resources are pretty obvious. Usually persistent.


### Universal Resource Indicator

Noun based and static.


### Statelessness

Statelessness is the absence of state. It assumes all HTTP requests are self-contained. This means 
everything is addressable, helping accessability and scalability as there are fewer failure modes.

It also works nices as HTTP is stateless.

### REST Methods

POST isn't (and shouldn't be) a catch-all.

GET and HEAD are immutable (or really should be).
## Support for REST in Rails

a.k.a. Routing.

```ruby
resources :controller
```

Will create a route for all REST/CRUD operations for that controller. Assuine the methods exists in
said controller.

Parameters are passed in as a hash table.

### URL Based Routing

* `url_for` provides `http://example.com/path` based navigation.
* `*_path` provides `/path` based navigation
* `*_url` provides `http://example.com/path` based navigation. I noted something about redirection.


### Pure Matching

```ruby
match 'path/:param' => controller#action
```

All routes are processed in order.


### Respond to methods

```ruby
respond_to do |format|
    format.type(params)
end
```

Will try to use the URL format, if not it will use the accept header. See also `respond_with`.
## Object Relation Mapping and Rails

### Why ORM?

ORM Focues on business code over SQL, reduces the need for special data access object classes. It
also means different methods of persistance can be supported.

ORM framework can be more robuse and efficient than pure SQL (depending on the framework) and 
allows for more reusable code. However they can be unweildly.


### ActiveRecord

Class is the table, an object is a row and an attribute is a column.

Pluralised by default, this can be overridden.

The model's attributes are implicitly derived from the database schema.

ActiveRecord uses the following type mapping (db -> Ruby):

* int -> FixNum
* decimal -> BigDecimal
* date -> Date
* BLOB, BLOD and Text -> String
* double and float -> float
* char and varchar -> String
* time -> Time
* boolean -> 0, "f", "false", "", nil -> false

The primary key is, by default, `:id`. Composite primary keys are not supported.

## CRUD

### Create:
```ruby
activeRecord.save

ActiveRecord.create(params)

ActiveRecord.new

ActiveRecord.new(params)

ActiveRecord.new do |u|
    u.foo = foo
end
```

ID automatically generated.


### Update:
```ruby
activeRecord.save
```
This still happens if attributes haven't changed. Can update without having got an item from the 
databse, so long as an item with the same id does exist.

```ruby
activeRecord.update_attributes(params)

ActivateRecord.update(id, params)

activeRecord.update_attribute(param)

ActivateRecord.update_all("update", "where")
```


### save, save!, create, create!

* `save` returns true or false.
* `save!` throws an exception on failure.
* `create` returns the object created or nil on failure.
* `create!` returns the object created or throws exception on failure.

As a side note, `create` shouldn't have an id on fail.

### Delete

```ruby
ActiveRecord.delete(id) # Can be a range too

ActiveRecord.delete_all(??)

ActiveRecord.destroy(activeRecord)

ActiveRecord.destroy(id) # Will search and find the instance first.
```

In the class you can define `before_destroy: callback` and `after_destroy: callback`.
This is true of all CRUD operations. Also note that these will cascade and be run in
the correct order for those models with relationships.


### Retrieve

```ruby
ActiveRecord.find(id) # May raise RecordNotFoundError

ActiveRecord.all()

ActiveRecord.where(params) # [] if not found

ActiveRecord.where("params=?", values) # Escaped to SQL
```

Note that `.where("param = #{var}")` is prone to SQL injection.

```ruby
ActiveRecord.where("param = :var", var: var)

ActiveRecord.where(params[:user]) # Maps to SQL.
```

Be careful about exposing the database to views. See the [Ruby on Rails Security Page](http://rubyonrails.orb/security.html).

```ruby
ActiveRecord.where("thing like ?", thing + "%") # Wildcards

ActiveRecord.where(?).first()

ActiveRecord.where(?).last()

ActiveRecord.where(?).order(?)

ActiveRecord.where(?).limit(?)

ActiveRecord.where(?).offset(?)

ActiveRecord.where(?).joins(?)

ActiveRecord.select(?)

ActiveRecord.uniq.where(jobs: true).limit(2).pluck(:surname) # SELECT DISTINCT firstname WHERE jobs='t' LIMIT 2

ActiveRecord.readonly(?)
```

### Full SQL

```ruby
ActiveRecord.find_by_sql([sql])
```

Use this for performance reasons or hard queries. Remember premature optimisation is the root of all evil.

### Find By

```ruby
ActiveRecord.find_by_attname

ActiveRecord.find_by_attname_and_att2name
```

Where `attname` is the literal name of the attribute.


### ActiveRecord and Relationships

Cached in a given action.

```ruby
thing.relation.att

thing.relation(true).att # Force Reload.
```
## Cryptopogy

### Reading List

* Applied Cryptography - Schneier B.
* Practical Cryptography - Ferguson N.
* The Code Book - Singh S.

### Problems

* Confidentiality
* Data Integrity
* Non-Repudiation
* Identification and Authentication
* Authorisation

All can be solved through cryptography.

### Encryption

Typically the process is as follows:

The Plaintext is run through an Encryption algorithm, producing the ciphertext. Which can then be Decrypted to get the plaintext back.

Sometimes we only use the first half of this, one-way encryption, which is useful for things like passwords.

Encryption/Decryption is also known by a few other names:

* Enciphering and Deciphering.
* Encoding and Decoding.

There are very few good encryption and decryption algorithms as security depends on a parameter of a key. This process is as follows:

The plaintext is encryption with a key to produce the ciphertext, then decrypted with a key to retrive the plaintext.

If these keys are the same this is known as symetic key encryption. Otherwise it is known as asymetric key encryption, better known as public key encryption.

### Symetric Key Encryption

Symetric key encryption tends to be less secure due to the nature of the keys being identical on either end. One of the first standards, DES, was a fixed length 56-bit key and is now completely insecure. DES had the advantage of being efficient due to hardware optimisation.

DES quickly became Triple DES, a varient which used three applications of DES with two inderpendant keys, reaching an effective length of 112-bits. The stratergy here was to encode with the first key then decode with another (?) then finally encrypt with the third and final key..

### Advanced Encryption Standard

Uses a block cipher which encrypts in blocks of 128, 192 or 256 bits. The key lengths are variable and inderpendant of block size.

Arranges blocks into rectangular matricies and performs 10-14 rounds of operation, which can be some of the following:

* Byte substitution.
* Shift row.
* Mix column.
* And round key.

Can be implemented very efficiently in harware and software.

* IDEA - Fixed length implemetation.
* RC2 and RC4 - Variable length implementation.
* Blowfish - Public domain, variable length implementation.

### Problems with keys

* Exactly the same key from encryption and decryption.
* Keys need to be changed regularly.
* Need to synchronised key changes.
* Ammounts to securly communication the key to communicate data securly.
* See Diffe-Hellman key exhange.

### Public Key Encryption

In public key encryption the keys are asymetric; a different key is used to decrypt the data from the one used to encrypt the data. This usually relies of some mathemtatical truths, a common public key algorithm might use the product of two prime numbers for the encryption key and the two prime numbers as the decryption key. This works as it is very difficult to factorise both prime numbers.

This has huge benefits; for a start knowing the encryption key does not mean you can decrypt the data. Due to this we can me the encryption key public, so long as we keep the decrpyion key private.

RSA uses the products of prime number. However there is a trade off, this is 100 times slower than DES in software, and 1000 times slower in hardware. Only recently has RSA been implemented in hardware.

There are other methods of public key cryptography:

* Discrete Lograithm Problem.
* Eliptic Curves Cryptosystems.

The intergrity of the private key is the weak link in Public Key encryption.

### Reverse Public Key Encryption

The nature of public key encryption means that you can also use the public key to decrypt ciphertext encrypted with the matching private key. This is more useful for signing requests and messages to verify that the author is who they say they are.

### Diffe-Hellman key exchange

Alice and Bob want to communicate securely. Alice gets the public key from Bob and combines it with her private key. Bob also combines his private key with the public key from Alice. This provides a symetrical key to easy encryption.

### Confidentiality

Any reasonable encryption method can solve this.

Needs good key management:

* Diffe-Hellman key exchange.
* Symetric key encryption for all transmission.
* Public key encryption for all session and symetric key exchange.

### Data Integrity

Simplest way is to include a hash of the original message.

Encryption using a private key means this hash is not easly faked.

All of this is known as a checksum.

### Non-Repudiation

Sign all messages with a secure hash generated from the private key.

Recieved response returns the secure hash with their private key so they cannont deny receiving the message.

### Digital Certificates

How can we trust that a key?

A digital certificate binds an identity of an entity to their public key. There are several forms of digital certifications

* Personal - For a single person.
* Site - For a website or business.
* Code-signed - For APIs or Client programs.
* Authority - Identifies the Certificate Authority (CA).

To trust a certificate it is typically given as part of a chain from the least to most known organisation. This ends with a self-signed certification from the CA.

You can generate your own certificate, but it will not be recognised by a browser or client program automatically as it will not be signed by a trusted CA.

### Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)

Protocol for secure transmission.

Sever and client handshake to agree on the type of technique used.

Bulk of the transmission is done using symetric key encryption for performance.

### Transport Layer Security (TLS)

More modern version of SSL with backwards compatability. Main difference is the cipher suites used.

### Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)

Developed for email, uses:

* RSA for key exchange
* RSA/DSS for digital signatures
* SHA-1 for integrity
* ZIP for compression
* CAST, TRiple DES, IDEA or Twofish for data encryption
* Rings of trust instead of chains
    * Theory is that you only trust those who you know.
    * Uses fingerprints.
    * Trust a new fingerprint if you have 3 people who know and trust that fingerprint.
    * Parallels to real life.

### Pretty Enhanced Mail (PEM)

...

### Secure Electronic Transaction (SET)

Three private/public keys:

* Customer
* Bank 
* Merchant

Customer details are kept secret from the merchant. Order details are kept secret from the bank.

Currently this is a slow technique and the structure is not in place for it to work. Could be more useful with the prevelance of mobile devices.

### Kerebos

Network authentication which uses a Key Distribution Centre (KDC) to store secret keys.

KDC sends Alice a key encrypted with her public key, which is decrypted to the key needed to autenticate on Bobs system

This is very complex when you get into the details of it and has the weakness of being a centralised system. There is a need to synchronise clocks across all systems to support key expiration.

### Simple Authentication and Security Layer (SASL)

Used in LDAP.

## SECURITY IS ALWAYS A COMPRIMISE
## Vunerabilities

This section of the course focuses on a lot of attacks that can happen on an internet based application and how to avoid common pitfalls.

### Code Injections Attacks

At date of teaching, the biggest vunerabilites are:

1. SQL Injection
2. Operating System command injection
3. ???
4. Code Injection

### SQL Injection

Involves inserting SQL statements into unsanitied inputs. Username/password combinations are a common target.

Most SQL injection involves inserting SQL meta-characters. Take the following example:

If the code is known to use the SQL statement:

```php
$stmt = "SELECT * FROM table WHERE id = '" + input + "';"
```

An attacker to insert the value:

```
' or 't'='t'
```

Which would always resolve to true and allow access to the system.

Obvious a clever attacker can then inject more complex SQL to access or modify the database.

The simplest solution is to avoid unsanatised input, however this is hard than it would seem. Java, for example, will nearly always interpret the string value `\u0027` as the single quote `'` character, which escaping the string cannot prevent.

Quite a few languages have built-in functions to handle this sort of operation.

Another thing to consider is data coming in from unexpected inputs. A form is just a POST request, so there is little point escaping the form data and not the POST data, for example.

A better approach still is not to allow direct input, prepared statements are a good example of this. However, it may not be possible to do such things.

Stored procedures could be used instead of raw SQL.

It might be interesting to see how well ORM frameworks deal with this sort of behaviour. I would personally assume well, but you never know :)

### Cross-Site Scripting (XSS)

Just a foreword, these days cross-site scripting does not necessarily have to be from another site, or be a script. It is just the name for any coding attack.

The idea of a XSS is to inject malicious code into webpages. There are two ways of doing this:

* Reflective (non-persistent).
* Stored (persistent).

Reflective attacks are more common.

### Reflective Cross-Site Scripting

The basic premise of reflective XSS attacks is that HTML sent back to the server is not validated and is used as part of the response. For example, if a search engine uses the search string as verbatim, and is sent back to the client this can contain code with is then interpreted.

An example flow of this is that the user is tricked into vistining the scoundrel site. This sends a script back which is then sent on to the target as part of an echo. The target performs the echo with the results.

### Stored Cross-Site Scripting

With stored XSS the malicious code is stored on the server. For example messages containing HTML sent to a message board as a simple example. These scripts may be designed to self-propegate.

An example flow is as follows:

The Cracker interacts with the `/form` page and gains some form of access to the DB, adding a script which changes the `/admin` page.

A naive admin user then interacts with the `/admin` page, which forwards on details to the scoundrel site.

Methods for avoiding this is not to allow unsanitised input, have better security for cookies and disable scripts.

### Cross-Site Request Forgery (XSRF)

Cross-site Request Forgery exploits the trust user has for a site. It can be hidden innocously in something like an image which has a POST request associated with it.

Typically this involves including a link or script to which a user is authenticated. It also typically involves some form of HTTP request.

Users should ensure they are logged out of systems.

Sites should check the HTTP referrer header, limit the lifetime of cookies and session. A user-specific token can be added to all forms and URLs which have side-effects.
## Single Sign-On

Enables a user to log-on once to a system without re-providing credentials.

### Security Assertion Markup Lanuage (SAML)

Developed by OASIS. SAML makes assertions about users, these assertions may contain statements that are used by resources to grant access to a resource.

There are 3 different kinds of statements:

* Authentication
    * Asserts that the user was authorised and how.
* Attribute
    * Asserts that a user is associated with certain attributes.
* Authentication Decision
    * Asserts that a user is permitted to do the action.

Usually involves a simple request response.

Each statement has a query, the response is a statement (except attribute statements, which result in an assertion containing the statement).

Version 2.0 introduces more protocols.

Use XML, HTTP and SOAP standards.

### Shibboleth

Open Source under Apache2.

User SAML.

Adopted by JISC.

Uses public keys to establish trust between domains.

### OpenID

Open Source decentralised Single Sign-On system.

Used by a lot of major organisations.

Uses XRDS documents.

The user obtains an OpenID with a provider. The user then interacts with a relying party (service provider). The Service provider may convert to a URI and request it.

The service provider has two ways in which they can communicate with the user:

1. `checkid_setup`
2. `checkid_immediate` for which the user is not directly involved.

Steps:

* Establish shared secret.
* ID provider authenticates user and asks if relying party is to recieve details.
    * If not user redirected to relying part unauthenticated.
* User is then redirected to the relying part authenticated.
* The relying party then validates using the shared secret.
* User is logged in.

### OpenID 2.0

URLs are under the users control.

XRI used for cross-domain digital IDs:

* `i-name` May be reassigned.
* `i-number` Is a UUID and cannot be reassigned.

### OAuth

IETF.

Uses cryptographic tokens instead of credentials, these tokens are issued for a specific site and time.

Twitter, Facebook, google and microsoft APIs are using OAuth.

OAuth is completely transparent to the user as they are asked if resorces on the server can be used by a client. A token is then provided from the server to the client.

THe user only ever needs to pass credentials to the server, not the client.

By default OAuth does not use SSL or TLS so the data is not confidential by default, however tokens expire quickly enough to prevent bad things™.

OAuth does not autherise the server or the client.

You should aim to use SSL/TLS with OAuth if you need a secure system.

Phising is common and there is no mechanism in place for scoping access.

Denial of service may be possible if an attack cna force a server to process many (fake) tokens quickly.

OAuth uses HMAC-SHA1 and RSA-SHA1 which are known to be weak.

XSRF vunerabilities.

Servers may want to automatically authenticate users.

## Java Security

**Note:** This may only be for Oracles JDK and the OpenJDK

Java has been built with security in mind. THe VM itself contains the security, not the underlying system.

Byte code can be verified for JVM code conformance.

`java.lang.SecurityManager` can be registered through `System.setSecurityManager(...)`, but is typically done at the command line.

`java.lang.ClassLoader` establishes trust between system classes and untrusted, imported classes. Java has the idea of a sandbox in which untrusted code can be run in a protected area (side note: how does this affect OSGi?).

Java security is theoretically sound, but there are still some programatic bugs.

### Security Policy

Security policies are typically done via configuration files.

`java.security.Policy` is the security policy.

`java.security.CodeSource` is the idenity of a class, defined in terms of the classes codebase and signature.

A security policy is defined by a map of identities to policies.

THe runtime argument `-Djava.security.manager` sets the default security manager, and `-Djava.security.policy=/path/java.policy` sets the policy.

### Permissions

All from `java.security.Permission`. Certain permissions imply other permissions. For example, allowing read on `/tmp/*` implies all files in `/tmp` are readable.

Something to consider with custom permissions:

```
grant [signedBy "$"][codeBase "$"] {
    permission <PermissionClass> ??? (damn my illegible handwriting)
}
```


