# SE36010 - Engineering Knowledge-Based Systems

Jun He (jqh) and Thomas Jansen (thj10).

Focuses on building knowledge-based systems for practical use. Introducing kinds of intelligent technologies currently being exploited, showing how to recognise which techniques are best to use by realising their strengths and limitations.



## Diagnostic Fault Tree

Diagnosis is where you determine the cause and effect of problem.

Wide applications of diagnosis from medical to network troubleshooting. Diagnostic systems and devices are designed by humans.

One of the most successful applications of knowledge-based systems.

Techniques:

* Apply logic
* Analysis
* Experience
* etc.


### Car Diagnosis

Customer provides technician with the details of the problem. The technician looks at the car (manual intervention). Probe readings are passed into a diagnostic computer which provides guidance to the technician.


### Effective Diagnostic System

* Efficient Construction
* Reasonable maintainability
* Adequate coverage
* Correct answer
* Minimum effort from user
* Appropriate response time
* Good cost to benefit ration.


### Diagnostic Tree

A tree structure where the nodes are questions and responses and edges are answers to the questions (*Author: A flowchart effectively*).

Allows a normal tree-search.

CLIPS and Jess can be used to build diagnostic systems or they can be programmed manually.


### Thinking

How do you get the knowledge for troubleshooting?

(*Author: I accidentally linked myself to [this](http://www.mez.co.uk/haynes.html) during the lecture. No more notes were taken.*)
# Case Based Reasoning

* Based on case law - made up of thousands of precedent cases
* Totally different from diagnostic fault tree and rule based system

* Works well for a broad but shallow domain: works well for a forest of trees
* Different kinds of expertise
* Based on experience rather than theory - important

# Case Based Reasoning and 4R cycle

* Retrieve
* Reuse & Revise
* Retain

Using Euclidean distance to calculate similarity between cases. Each feature is assigned a weighting.

* Consider all the bulletpoints from the presentation in the assignment
* Consider storing cases with indexes for easy retrieval.

# Ranking

* If multiple cases match, rank by similarity
* Consider time and cost of operations# Case Based Part 2

## Existing systems

Aber uni:

* CASPIAN (1990s) case based system capable of dealing with realistic case-based reasoning problems
* Download from link on slides
* Written in C

Other platform:
* jCOLIBRI - open source java platform written by University of Madrid
* GAIA - group of artificial intellegence applications

## Similarity Functions

* Similarity measure
* Assign a weighting to each attribute
* Set the value of K - number of cases to retrieve

## Cases

For a holiday suggestion system:
* Useful attributes - Id, hotel type, location, etc
* Solution - price and hotel
* Description - remaining attributes

If the returned cases aren't similar enough to the current case, they can be manually adjusted.
